Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
In 1979, two remarkable science fiction novels that seemed to share a number of amazing coincidences were published.
One of the novels was The Fountains of Paradise, the Hugo Award winner for that year.
Its author was British writer Arthur C. Clarke.
The other was Web Between the Worlds.
Its author was Charles Sheffield, also British.
Besides the fact that both authors were British, both novels treated an identical theme, satellites and geosynchronous Earth orbit, or space elevators.
Neither author knew that someone else was working with the same idea, but Sheffield doesn't believe it's that startling a coincidence.
It's not really very surprising because the idea has been around a long time.
The idea was proposed back in 1960, and I read of it in 1966, which was the first time it was published in the West.
A Russian called Art Sutanov published it in 1960, but he published it in Russian in a publication that no one ever saw or heard of.
But I remember the 1966 publication in Science Magazine, and thinking that's a neat idea, and putting it off in the back of my head.
And presumably several others had noticed it and thought of it at the same time.
And it's coincidence that Clarke and I should write the books so close together.
But in a sense, if the books hadn't been written so close together, they would not both have been written.
Because when somebody has written a book on a subject like that, there's a tendency for other people not to write with that same technological development.
Sheffield says there was something coincidental about his discovery, before publication of either book, that Clarke had done the same thing that he had.
The coincidence was that after I had reached the point where I had sent my manuscript off to Ace Books,
and a friend of mine said that he'd heard that Clarke had written this book, which was then available in Galles, in which he had a space elevator.
And when I read the book, I sent Clarke my manuscript, and he wrote back and said he was fascinated, but he wasn't that surprised.
And when I read his book, I realized what he meant by that.
What he meant was that when you get right down to it, the basic physics dictates what the structure must be like.
And it's very natural to have your hero previously making a bridge, a bridge builder, because this is in a sense a bridge from the earth up to orbit.
We had both, in fact, chosen heroes with very similar names.
That was a coincidence. His hero was called Morgan, mine was called Merlin.
And before they built the space elevator, they had both been the world's leading builder of bridges.
Sheffield goes on to relate some of the less obvious similarities about the two novels.
But there were some other rather strange coincidences that were not obvious from reading the books.
One of them was when I was thinking of my principal character, I had as a model for him a 19th century English engineer called Brunel.
Well, it turned out that Clarke actually had Brunel in his book and references to him.
And that's an odd coincidence that is perhaps explained by the fact that Clarke came from England, and so did I.
And we were sensitive to the English engineering tradition. That's the only way I can explain that.
But there were a number of coincidences. It's not too surprising that we should write books in which the beanstalk or space elevator looked very similar.
But there are other things that are a bit more surprising than that.
But as one of my characters, it keeps on saying in a different book, the laws of probability don't just permit coincidences.
They absolutely require them. And to me, it's not that surprising that Clarke and I should have written the same book at the same time.
Not the same book if you follow me, but books with a similar theme.
Science fiction readers should feel fortunate, coincidences are not, that both of these remarkable novels were published.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show is a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Lane.
Charles Sheffield belongs to that small subgroup of science fiction authors who are practicing scientists.
Hal Clement, Robert Forward, Fred Hoyle, and soon Carl Sagan will be some other authors in the group.
Sheffield, who has a degree in theoretical physics and works for the Earth Satellite Corporation in Washington, D.C., has published such popular novels as Web Between the Worlds,
Sight of Proteus, and My Brother's Keeper, in addition to numerous short stories.
We asked him how he found time to be a scientist and a science fiction author.
Well, I don't write as much as what my wife would call real writers write.
Full-time writers should be able to produce a lot more than I do.
One reason I produce as much as I do produce is because I enjoy it.
I consider it a form of pleasure and relaxation.
And so I do it for choice when I'm not doing other things.
But I feel that if I didn't have a job, I might write a lot more, but I would probably enjoy it a lot less.
And in terms of somebody who is prolific, I don't produce much at all.
If you look at the productivity of, well, now I have to think of somebody who's prolific.
I suppose Andy Offit has written a couple of hundred books probably.
CJ Cherry produces, I think, probably three books a year.
Jack Chalker produces probably five books a year.
Silverberg, when he was writing full-time, produced Lord knows how many words a year.
One and a half million, two million, something like this.
In terms of productive people, I have a minute output.
When we remark that many readers liked his fiction so well they'd wished he'd take up writing full-time and produce more of it,
he had an interesting response.
The definition that people use of a real writer is somebody who has to write,
who will starve if they can't write, and will write even if they have to starve.
I don't think that makes sense.
By those terms, I don't consider I'm a real writer at all because although I like to write,
it's not the top of my priority of things I want to do.
And the scientific work occupies a higher slot.
But Marion Zimmer Bradley said that when she had to choose between a marriage and her writing,
or anything else in her writing, her writing wins, that it's the most important thing in her life.
I just don't have that much attachment to it.
And I think the fact that I didn't write for so long, that I started for no particular reason,
after not writing for a long time, may be one of the reasons I don't consider I'm a true writer.
I never felt the urge to write when I was young.
I never felt that fiction was something I had to do.
But many writers have that, and it dominates their lives.
Finally, we asked Sheffield if he had fun writing.
I think I do.
I certainly love to sit down and write.
I often don't have time to do it, but that's a different consideration.
I find that the several things that help me, one is that I don't have to do it, that I'm doing it as a hobby.
Another is that I write lots of nonfiction.
And when I write nonfiction, I'm constrained in what I can think.
In other words, if you're writing respectable science, you somewhat have to put yourself into an acceptable framework.
And if you think outrageous thoughts, you can't really write them down, or you have to limit yourself.
Whereas in fiction, you can think the most outrageous thoughts imaginable.
And generally speaking, the more outrageous they are, the more people like them.
So I do enjoy writing.
Music
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Music
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Lane.
Marion Zimmer Bradley's latest novel is a fantasy epic that deals with the legends of King Arthur.
It's entitled The Mists of Avalon, and it's recently been published in a hardcover edition by Alfred A. Knopf.
There are numerous retellings of the Arthurian material. Some scholarly, some pure fantasy, but the myths of Avalon is different.
In the first place, it's built around a strong thesis that the rise of Arthur as a Christian king in a male-dominated society coincided with the passing away of the old pagan religion of the Celtic Druids, which was female-oriented.
And secondly, Bradley concentrates her narrative on the women of the Arthurian legends.
These would include Gwinnivir, Arthur's wife and queen, Igraine, his mother, Vivianne, the Lady of the Lake, and High Priestess of Avalon, and Morgaine, or Morgan Le Fay, sorceress and wizard lady.
Bradley tells us how she came to write the book.
Well, all my life I've been fascinated by King Arthur, but even more I've been fascinated by Morgan Le Fay.
Valerie didn't approve of her, and she's been treated as a sort of evil sorceress, quote unquote.
And you can hear the capital letters all the way from Texas, I'm sure.
So I started wondering who Morgan Le Fay and the Lady of the Lake really were.
And there were a lot of books on the search for the historical Arthur, but I started out on the search for the historical Morgan Le Fay.
How did she get into the legends?
And it led me into the byways of pagan religions, into druidism, into, I don't mean the modern thing, but what Caesar wrote about, and enormous amounts of ancient, you might say, ancient culture.
So I finally came up with the realization that the whole Arthurian cycle is based upon the shift from druidical and Celtic religions to Christianity,
and in the Celtic culture and the Celtic mythology and the Celtic religion, women were preeminent, whereas in Christianity, St. Jerome and St. Augustine tried to convince every woman that she should be constantly doing the same thing.
And St. James was a woman, and that ghastly culture shock, I think, pervaded the whole Arthurian mythos.
Mallory didn't get hold of it until later.
The novel is remarkable for its wealth of detail and its attention to character, both strong points in all of Mary and Zimmer Bradley's work.
All of the characters from the Arthurian legends come alive in the novel, people like Merlin, Gwain and Gallahad.
Lancelot is in the novel, of course, and his love of Gwunivir is sensitively handled by Bradley.
Bradley talks about the ideas beneath the novel.
I took one element of fantasy, the idea that as our beliefs in the world change, our world changes with it.
The idea that people used to act and believe as if the world were the center of the universe, and now we know that the sun is at the center of our galaxy,
but that we're way out on the edge of it, and that changes our relationship to ourselves and our world.
When people believed that the source of life was just the mother, that was one belief system which very firmly and deeply pervaded their consciousnesses.
And then when the idea came that the mother was incidental, that man was created in God's image and women was just a poor imitation,
it must have been a monster culture shock.
And so I gave the idea that the world actually changed at that time, that the religion, the idea of only having one God instead of a pantheon of God,
changed people's minds.
So I took one fantasy element, the idea that as these old world, as people's ideas changed, the world changed too.
So the world where the elves lived sort of went into another dimension, being replaced by a world of pagan religion,
and then when the world changed again, the world of pagan religion, what I call the world of Avalon, went into the mists.
Anyone who likes fantasy, or anyone who enjoys reading about King Arthur, will be fascinated with the mists of Avalon.
And the fascination should last for a long while too. In its hardcover format, the novel is over 800 pages. The word epic describes it well.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.